---
layout:     post
title:      4 things learnt in the pandemic 
date:       2021-06-03 13:30
summary:    Psychologically and technologically we should be prepared to embrace changes.
categories: psychology, technology, communication, workspace
---

<blockquote>
  <p>The Pessimist Sees Difficulty In Every Opportunity. The Optimist Sees Opportunity In Every Difficulty.</p>
  <footer><cite title="Winston Churchill">Winston Churchill</cite></footer>
</blockquote>

2020 has been a special year to everyone. Despite losing opportunities to travel
across the world, meeting people, and attending physical conferences, I was
lucky to grow with tremendous learning through the challenging yet enjoyable
life. I summarized what I cherished the most in my learnings as below.

![Painting](https://yueguoguo.github.io/images/silverlight.jpg) <font size="1">I
did the acrylic painting to inspire myself as well as the people who see it with
an anticipation of good things to come (the light in the center of the
overcast).</font>

## Get The Innovative Ideas Implemented

I worked in the industry that progresses pressingly and rapidly. Innovative
mindset had occupied my head for quite some time. Inspired by the famous
"creating the future" quote, I pushed myself to be up with the most advanced
technology to make sure that I am always cutting the edge. I realized the
importance of "implementing" the idea when I found it hard to find the value
proposition of *just* innovating after I started to work more like a product
developer than a scientist. Many times *implementation is more pivotal than, or
at least, equally important to, innovation*. Sparkling a new idea may cost
research, dialectic, critics, etc., which can usually be achieved by an
individual. Implementing a good idea, however, requires inspiration, execution,
collaboration, operationalisation, and maybe even more. All of these
constructively force the stuff that is being built move towards something that
is really useful and meaningful to its audience. And, this can only be achieved
by a team. From innovation to implementation, it is not just a switch of mindset
and/or skill set, cognitively it is also a transfer from self-centeredness to
open-mindedness. Being a part of the team helps boost the process of
implementation. 

## Keep The Communication Going

Pandemic makes it hard for people to collaborate effectively due to reduced
chances of face to face meeting. The key to being collaboratively efficient is
that whoever is involved in the work together should *keep the communication
going*. One of the techniques for developers to keep good communication rolling
is ["Pair Programming"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pair_programming).
Broadly, the communication may refer to either the conversation in the pair
programming session, discussion offline in the GitHub issues tab, or messages in
the communication platform. A pair programming session often involves at least
two people joining into the same session, where one can take the drive of
development while the other can help review it. I can be fully productive with
the help of the tools like [Microsoft Teams](https://www.microsoft.com/en-sg/microsoft-teams/group-chat-software), [GitHub](https://github.com/), [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) with a
remote connection to the server, etc., to conduct a pair programming session
with my colleagues. The code assets can be either lively shared or synchronized
offline with the peer in the pair programming session conveniently. Pair
programming keeps a proper level of tense and flexibility in the session. It
catalysts the interaction between the developers in the same meeting and
products positive feedback to each other. It helps spot and resolve challenging
technical issues quickly even if people involved in the session do not meet at
person, and therefore it maintains the agility of software development
practices.

## Be "AIM" 

Even though communications can be kept frequent online via the collaboration
tools, in-person meetings definitely do better in building trust. A lot of
times, without eye contact, the messages in a talk cannot be precisely conveyed.
Therefore this leads to misleading and thus downgrade of efficiency. I always
appreciate working with people who are willing to place themselves in others'
situations. It's not easy but quite essential to behave considerate when
collaborating with others under the constraints of a virtual workspace. I
personally suggest and apply the "AIM" principle that a personal should stick to
for delivering the best communication efficiency, that is, *Adaptive*,
*Inclusive*, and *Mindful* (taking the first letter of the three words it
becomes "AIM").

* Adaptiveness requires one to adjust the way of thinking of and/or approaching
  a problem when having obstacles to move forward. The general ask for being
  adaptive is that, understanding the difficulties created by the pandemic, a
  person should consider changing the conventional working styles he/she is used
  to. Such change may cause some disrupt degradation in terms of efficiency but
  in the long-term run it may create opportunities to re-gain the loss.

* Inclusiveness plays a vital role in an virtual environment where people live
  and work in total different conditions. For example, I don't have kids so it
  may not be very good to schedule meetings with my colleagues with kids in
  early morning because it is usually when they take care of their kids.

* Being mindful is being aware of not just oneself but also the people
  (physically or virtually) surrounding him/her. Mindfulness is always
  considered as an effective way for stress reduction. I have to say being
  mindful is not that easy a lot of times. Many great people I have worked with
  seldom talk (they prefer spending more time on coding :D) and it is therefore
  hard to get their mind. This does not mean we don't have to be mindful with
  them. Instead, people who have a more outgoing characteristics should create
  conversation for breeding mindfulness in the relationship.

## Be Sensitive About Time Management

It is far easier than one can imagine to waste time when working from home. I
tried hard to establish a healthy discipline when I used to work in the office -
I got up early in the morning, had breakfast, took the train to get to the
office, started to code or have meetings. Perfect. Since the pandemic, I have
stayed at home most of the times (I still go to office once a week). The biggest
challenge I found is that working-from-home soften the boundary between life and
work. I often have conference calls in the night, and very often, this becomes
the excuse to get up late in the next morning. As a consequence, the priorities
next day need to be pushed back due to the waste of the morning. A sensible
management of time is therefore important to keep oneself disciplined while
maintaining the work-life balance. It is apparently not-trivial to create a
completely similar environment at home to that in the office. But one can still
do something to make a difference. 

* Use tools to keep yourself organized. I try to use software (e.g., [Microsoft
  To Do](https://todo.microsoft.com/tasks/)) to manage my "to-do" list with
  prioritization.
* Learn to say "no" to the meeting schedule at an irregular base - this greatly
  helps build the routine of work at home and thus improves the efficiency to
  get things done with the time frame as expected.
* Break the tasks into small ones so that time to spend on each of them can be
  easily managed. 
* Build a strong willpower to stay resilient by "wasting" some time. Take on
  some tasks that are easy to tackle with, pet your cats, gaze at nowhere for a
  few minutes - these all contribute to emotionally strengthen the will to stay
  focused when back to desk.

## References

Find some further readings in the following about the topics discussed above. 

1. Andrei Paleyes, Raoul-Gabriel Urma, and Neil D. Lawrence, Challenges in
   Deploying Machine Learning: a Survey of Case Studies. NeurIPS Workshop: ML
   Retrospectives, Surveys & Meta-Analytises (ML-RSA), 2020 
1. Cockburn, Alistair; Williams, Laurie (2000). "The Costs and Benefits of Pair
   Programming" (PDF). Proceedings of the First International Conference on
   Extreme Programming and Flexible Processes in Software Engineering.
1. Kabat-Zinn J (2013). Full Catastrophe Living: Using the Wisdom of Your Body
   and Mind to Face Stress, Pain, and Illness. New York: Bantam Dell.
1. Jane McGonigal, "Building Resilience by Wasting Time", Harvard Business
   Review, 2012.
